So, ready to start?
Yeah.
Okay, so we have now Esteba with Game Boy and his cell phone.
Hello, and thanks for being here for this talk about Game Boy peripheral that I think
is very interesting and versatile.
I'm Esteba and I've been working to emulate and restore this peripheral on and off for
the last six years or so.
But first, I should tell you what it is.
The mobile adapter GB is a peripheral that allows you to connect your Game Boy up to
your cell phone, allowing games to make and receive calls in part to also call an internet
service provider and connect to the internet, allowing for all sorts of online connectivity,
like sharing scores and getting updates for various things.
It was one of the very first attempts by Nintendo to have any sort of online connectivity for
consoles, but what makes this one very interesting in my opinion is that it supported a few rather
high profile games.
There were actually a few variations of this adapter made for several different phones.
You have a blue, a yellow and a red one.
The green one for PHS was also planned but never released.
But what you will notice is that none of these actually work for any non-Japanese phones.
So this service never left the island and unfortunately it was sunset very early, almost
two years into its life in December 2002.
But to give you a better idea of what this peripheral could do, we will talk a little bit about the
games that supported it.
So first of all, you got the mobile trainer with the adapter.
It was used to configure the adapter and you had to use this before you could connect to the internet.
It also came with a very useful usage manual but it also had some very interesting utilities,
which were a mail client which supported both SMTP and POP and could communicate with the outside
world so you could actually receive real emails.
And a very minimal web browser which was hard-coded to one website to read news about Nintendo games
and games for this peripheral.
Now, the very first game that was released for this thing was Pokemon, a very popular franchise
that I'm sure you're familiar with.
But it was actually one of the very first time you were able to battle and trade online with your friends
or at very large distances at least.
Besides that, it also featured a battle tower which allowed you to fight people who have entered that tower previously.
It got localized with NPCs in the west but the Japanese version worked with this adapter.
You also had a trade corner which is a bit of a prototype of the global trade station which appeared back in Generation 4.
And you had a news machine which I think is the most interesting part because you could download scripts which had news items
but also many games, questionnaires and you had rankings to show off your friends how big your Magikarp is.
Another very interesting game in my opinion is Net the Get which was one of the only titles which used the MBC6 on the Game Boy.
It's a minigame collection that came with 15 built-in minigames which could download more and more would be released over time
though they never reached the titular 100 minigames unfortunately.
A few other games that were very interesting, Mobile Golf which is a sequel to Mario Golf which never got localized
but it came bundled with the adapter later in its life to help sell the adapter.
Starcom which is a sort of pet simulator, Game Boy Wars which was part of the Wars series known for Advanced Wars and Famicom Wars
and Mario Kart which allowed you to upload and download ghost data.
So let's tell you a little bit about how this project got started and where we are now.
Somewhere in 2016, Haki posted a thread on GlitchCelapse which explained a little bit about how the mobile adapter protocol worked.
From there we spun up the Python script which communicated with the BGB emulator
allowing you to have a proof concept that this thing actually worked.
Somewhere in 2018, a guy named Shinumi who is known for emulating various peripherals including suing machines and phishing sonars which were made for the Game Boy.
Also emulated the mobile adapter and specifically Net-to-Get and created very comprehensive documentation that we are updating and keeping track of to this day.
And at some point people wanted to actually bring a real Game Boy to connect to the internet and that's kind of where I stepped in and we started doing stuff.
So fast forward to today, we have a group called Rion.
We are a group of preservationists, developers and enthusiasts who want to preserve this system and make it usable to the common user as it used to be.
For that we are making emulators, servers and translations for a few of the games so that they can be enjoyed by a wider audience.
So to give you an idea of how this all fits together, I will explain a bit about how the system connects together.
So this is a connection diagram.
On the left side you have the user's Game Boy which communicates through a custom link protocol with the adapter which further communicates with a proprietary protocol with a mobile phone.
The mobile phone is connected to the phone network but depending on who you call you can either call a friend and communicate with their phone directly.
And this was used for example for the Pokemon trading and battling.
Or you could call the internet service provider and use the point-to-point protocol to tunnel your connection through TCP and UDP to the official Nintendo servers.
Now most of this stuff is kind of irrelevant when we are emulating this because when we are emulating it we can kind of make big black boxes depending on what you are doing.
This is how it would look if you have a simple microcontroller that connects to your Game Boy and then further connects through USB to your computer.
Your computer will communicate to either the game server or if you want to call a friend then we have set up a relay to punch through router firewalls and that sort of thing which allows you to connect to any other player on the world.
And this can either be hardware or these blocks can either be full emulator which also emulates like the Game Boy itself and the adapter so it's a little bit more variable.
So we have full documentation and emulation of the peripheral itself or at least the part that communicates with the Game Boy.
And for that we have made a library called LibMobile.
This library can be integrated into all sorts of projects from software emulators to hardware emulators and back.
We've integrated thus far into the BGB emulator which is a Game Boy Color emulator.
We've integrated into the MGB emulator.
We've made a little fun interface to configure it as well.
And some people have been playing around with making it work on the Raspberry Pi Pico and communicating over Wi-Fi for example or the Arduino Uno which is mostly what I've been using.
There's also the GBE plus emulator which was made by the Shonumi which I mentioned before.
This is more of a local only emulator but it's for some games that we don't yet.
And of course full documentation of this is available in Dandox.
So these are a few of the examples of things of setups that people have put together.
On the far left you've got the simplest one which is just breaking out a few wires and connecting them to the Arduino and then just plugging that into your computer and doing it like that.
Some people have made PCBs.
The central one is able to communicate over Wi-Fi and Xenaro really active user lately has made a 3D print version of it as well.
Now of course you don't need to connect it directly to a computer.
You can also just use a modern phone which are basically computers these days.
We've also of course started emulating the server side of things.
We have the relay server which I've mentioned before which gives you a phone number and allows you to call someone else.
We have a mail server which is implemented in Node.js and stores in SQL so we can manipulate the emails more easily.
And we have a few complete game servers for Pokemon Crystal which supports actually everything at this point.
And a very driven person called Winter who has fully emulated Mario Kart and Monopoly though Monopoly doesn't have many features unfortunately.
Also GBE plus has emulated a few games in particular Net-to-Get Game Boy Wars, All Japan GT Championship and Hello Kitty's Happy House which allows you to send emails with items to your friends which is very cute I think.
And of course we've also made a few translations in particular Pokemon Crystal of course was already localized but we've restored all the functionality for it.
And we've also ported all of those changes to the four other languages that the game was released for.
Mark Max came to us asking if we were interested in his mobile golf translation and most of it has been translated but not the mobile features because we don't have any support for it yet.
And the mobile trainer which of course is a cornerstone of this whole thing.
If you want to get into it or make an emulator for yourself or develop a game that supports this thing.
We have of course the mobile which allows you to emulate the adapter itself.
We have the re-enrollable story which you can extend with other games or if you want to emulate those though I would suggest if you make homebrew that you make your own server behind this.
And unfortunately we still don't have a client library the library that runs in the Game Boy itself though we have reverse engineered the library from the Nintendo SDK.
If you don't care about licensing problems.
So in conclusion most of the things that you'd want to see are already there.
Of course we don't have all the games yet.
The problem that we're mostly struggling with right now is authentication and getting this useful for actual people who aren't very techie.
So if you want to help with any of that documentation making tools websites whatever you can reach us on unfortunately discord only.
We have if you want to make a matrix server and bridge that I would be very happy but unfortunately right now it would be the only person who would use that.
Our github is over there and show numies block with a lot of more peripherals and funky things that he's emulated with the Game Boy.
Can be reached through his github pages.
That was it.
Thank you.
We have time for one or two quick questions.
I have a very quick question.
Thanks for the talk.
Do you know how the original games that you could download of the Internet back in the 2000s how those were captured.
How those have been like captured like that's like 22 years ago.
So one of the things that we actually sometimes need help with is if you have any of the games that supported the mobile adapter.
Don't run them dump the save directly.
If the battery still lives then we might be able to restore some of the games that were supported back then.
Thankfully though we have the 15 built in games which serve as an example to make more so that helps a lot already.
Another quick question.
Yes.
No.
Okay.
Well then.
Thank you.
You can get prepared.
It was really interesting.
Thank you.